♪ [music] ♪
In this next video, let's log out and
we're going to create the password reset
flow. So I'm going to log out, and I'm
going to go to the Login page.
Below the Login page, I also want another
form that says, "Forgot my password." So
let's open up our Login.pug, and you'll
notice that we're already using mixins
here for our "loginForm". So we can create
another mixin for our "forgot".
Go to our mixins folder here. We'll make
it, "_forgot.pug". It's going to need a
mixin called "forgotForm", and from that
you're going to have a form with a class
of "form". The action is going to be,
"/account/forgot", and the method is going
to be "POST". Then, you simply just need
an h2 tag that says, "I forgot my
password!" You have a label for the email.
Input, [inaudible 00:01:01 to 00:01:04].
Good. Oh, make sure that this indented one
level deep, because it's inside of our
mixin. Now, go back to our Login.pug file,
and we'll include both the "loginForm" and
the "forgot" one, and then we called it
our "forgotForm". So we'll use it again,
"+forgotForm". Good. Refresh. There we go.
"I forgot my password!" I've got an email
address, and then we've reset it. So
that's the easy part. Now comes,
I think, a relatively complex part. Which
is, when somebody forgets their password,
how do you securely do it? So it's going
to be a multistep process,
of when somebody submits this form, what
we're going to do is we're going to first
check if that person has an email address
on file. If they do have an email address
on file, we are going to set a token in
their user being like,
"This is the password reset token," as
well as an expires date,
which means that the person requested that
their password be reset,
and they can only do that within an hour,
just for security's sake.
Then, those two pieces of information are
going to be emailed to them.
They can click on the link, and then come
back to our website.
If they have a proper token and a date
that is not expired, then they will be
able to go ahead and reset their password.
So there's a lot going on here.
We're going to need to check if the people
are there. We need to set tokens.
We need to save the user. We need to send
out emails. So we're going to [step] this
piece by piece and really just absolutely
nail this password reset flow.
My hope with this is that you be able to
keep this password reset flow,
and then move it into any apps that you're
doing with Express and Passport.
So let's get started. We'll open up our
index.js to begin, and we'll also open up
our Auth controller. In our Auth
controller, we are first going to make our
"forgot". So when somebody submits this
reset form, it's going to go to our forgot
authentication method. So we'll say,
"exports.forgot = async (req,
res)". Now, inside of here, there's really
four different things that need to happen.
First, what we need to do is see if that
user exists. [inaudible 00:03:15].
Because somebody might think that they
have used their email, but they either
don't have an account or they've used
another email. So that's the first thing
we need to check. If there actually is a
user, we need to set,
"Reset tokens and expiry on their
account." So what's going to happen is
that if they do, we're going to say,
"user.reset" password token "=".
You don't have to type this. I'm just
explaining. We're going to do a random
token that's going to look like this, and
that's going to get emailed to them for
them to come back with that token. Then,
we're also going to say,
"user.expires =" and then we're going to
give it some sort of date from now.
So we're going to say whatever now is plus
an hour. So they have an hour to come back
to us with this token. That will then
allow them to reset their password.
So that's the second thing. The third
thing is we're going to send them an email
with the token. Right? Because you can't
just give them the token right away here.
You need to actually show them that they
have access to that email account before
they can reset the password. Then, four,
finally, what we need to do is redirect to
login page after the email token has been
sent to them. Good. So first things first,
we want to see if a user with that email
exists. Well, we don't even have an email
yet. So let's go back to index.js. We'll
go down to the bottom here.
Where are we posting this data to? We're
posting it to "/account/forgot".
So I'll say,
"router.post(`/account/forgot`". When that
happens, we're going to catch errors, and
we're going to use the method that we're
working on here, authController.forgot. Go
here, and we'll see if there's even a
user. So it's "const user = await
User.findOne". So we're going to find one,
and what is the one piece of information
we are able to find them on?
Well, their email address, because that's
what they're providing to us.
So we're going to say the email is
"req.body.email". Then, at this point,
we need to see, if there is no user,
"if(!user)", then we have to tell them,
"That actually didn't work." So we'll say,
"req.flash". That is an error and the
error is going to be, "No account with
that email exists". So at this point,
you may be screaming at me and being like,
"Wes, Wes, Wes! Don't ever do that." So
there is a possible security
implementation here, where somebody could
possibly use this to see if they had a
huge list of email addresses.
They could see which people have signed up
for this. Or if this was some sort of
private website, where you should not be
able to check if somebody has an account
or not at that website, given that you
know their email, then you shouldn't be
able to do this. So at this point, what
some people will do, if you do not want to
tell your user that no account with that
email exists, you would tell them,
"A password reset has been mailed to you."
Even though there actually is no user,
you still want to tell the user, "Hey,
something was sent to you if an account
actually exists behind that." So that's
totally up to you, [whether] what type of
website your running. In this case, I
don't mind tell my users that nothing
exists with that email address. But again,
that's totally up to you.
Then, we will return the "res.redict". We
want to redirect them back to the Login
page. Good. So if there is no user, then
just tell them, "Hey,
that didn't actually work." But if there
was a user, that means right here we will
have a user, we are going to set our
password token and our password expires so
that they can have that information. So
"user.resetPasswordToken =".
Now, we need just a random bunch of keys
in order for that to work,
and there is actually something built
right into Node.js, which will allow us to
get cryptographically secure, random
strings. So that's a module that's built
into Node. You don't have to npm install
this. It's called "Crypto." So we'll go to
the top here and we'll import it, "const
crypto = require(`crypto`)".
Then, Crypto itself, has a method which
will allow us to generate a random string.
So we'll say,
"crypto.randomBytes(20).toString" and we
ask for the hex. So that will put the
token into the user. Then,
we'll say, "user.resetPasswordExpires",
because we don't want this to be good
forever. We want it to only be allowed to
reset it for one hour.
So we'll say "Date.now", which is now, "+
3600000". That is one hour from now.
That will give them one hour to reset
their actual password. Now that we have
those new fields here, a couple things.
First, I've got a red underline here,
"User is not defined." Why? Because we
never imported it into the top here.
So let's quickly import Mongoose, and then
get the reference to our model.
Good. So that sums up that one issue. Now,
I have another issue where these fields,
"resetPasswordToken" and
"resetPasswordTokenExpires", those are not
fields on our schema, and we need to add
them. So let's go to our user.js,
where we have our schema. Let's go down
here, and then we're going to say,
"Add those two fields." So it was
"resetPasswordToken" and
"resetPasswordExpires". Each of those,
well, the first one, the token is going to
be a string, and the expire is going to be
a date. So string and date.
Good. So we'll be able to add those. Now
that we've set those two fields on our
user, we need to save them. So we, "await
user.save". That's a nice little way to
just wait until the user is actually
saved. Then, we need to send them an email
with that token and redirect them to the
Login page. So what we can do right now is
I'm just going to send them back a token
immediately. Obviously,
you'd never do that in the real world. But
the next video, we're going to get into
sending email. Right now, I just want to
actually get the token working.
So we will go here and we'll say, "const
resetURL =" and we'll make it "http".
Now, we need the URL of where we're
operating, and that can be set on
"req.headers.host", and that will give us
in our case "local host".
But if you deploy that, it'll give you the
domain name that you're running at,
very handy, "/account/reset/" the actual
token, which is going to be "abc123".
So we can pop the
"user.resetPasswordToken". All right. So
we have this "resetURL". Then, what we can
do at this point is just tell the user
that it has worked. So I'll say,
"req.flash(`success`," and we'll do "`You
have been emailed a password reset link.'"
Then, I'm actually going to put the
password reset link right into here.
Again, don't ever do this,
because that would allow someone to reset
any URL, but just for the sake of
simplicity, because we're not doing email
just yet. We are going to email it to them
in just a second, and then we will say,
"res.redirect". We want to redirect them
to "/login". Cool. So let's open up our
MongoDB Compass. Let's refresh.
You'll know here that I have a salt, a
hash, an ID, an email, and a name.
But if I try to reset my password and
click Send Reset, and give this a refresh,
you'll see that I've now added a reset
password, which is the date of when it
will... Right now, it is 12:55, so at 1:55
it's going to expire.
Then, the token is 427c9999, whatever. I'm
able to get to this URL here,
that should be a "/account", by grabbing
it right from here. Again,
this would be emailed to us. We're going
to take that out before we deploy to live.
Good. So that's the first part of it.
Let's just double-check that.
If I put in like a "no@no.com," let's see
if that tells us it doesn't exist.
Good. It tells us that account doesn't
exist. But if I put in "wesbos@gmail.com",
it gives us this reset URL here. Good. So
I'm actually going to go to this URL,
and that will help us complete our next
step. Which is once somebody has got this
special URL from their email, what's the
process to then update their password?
So I'm going to visit this URL here. It's
going to 404, and we have to now create a
route for that to help. We have to now
create a route for that to [happen].
Go back to our routes and make a route to
handle this "/account/reset/" and then the
actual token that we have. We'll go to
index.js and I'll say, "router.get".
Anytime someone visits "/account/reset/"
any token, we are going to catch errors
and use the authController.reset method
that we have. Then, we'll go back to our
authController.js and make that reset
method. We'll make it async.
Say, "req", enter a response. Then, from
that we are going to take the token and
check, A, is there somebody with this
token and, B, is this token not yet
expired? So let's just say,
"res.json(req.params)", just so I can show
you here that this token, 63cf, should
show up as a token. Good.
We can then search for the user, "const
user = await User.findOne".
I want to find somebody, and now this is
the tricky part, where the
"resetPasswordToken" is equal to the
"req.params.token". So somebody has to
know that token in order to get to this
URL, and that's because it's been emailed
to them. Then, also, we want to find that
the date is greater than now.
So we'll say, "resetPasswordExpires is"
and this is kind of a cool query that you
can do in MongoDB, is you don't just set
it to a value. You set it to an object,
where the key is greater than, "$gt",
"Date.now". Wow. Okay. So what that does
is, if we look back at our MongoDB Compass
here, you'll see that we're going to look
for an expires that is greater than right
now. So we know that the token is still
valid, because it is in the future. If
it's been more than an hour,
that token will have been in the past and
we can't access it anymore.
So there we have the user and we say, "If
there is no user," so if that search right
here didn't find someone, either because
the token was wrong or because the expires
was already expired, then we'll just tell
them, we'll say, "req.flash(`error`,".
Say, "`Password reset token is invalid or
has expired)". Then,
we'll redirect them. Cool. So let's
actually try going to "/abc" and hit
Enter. Oh, redirect. Put a T on there.
Let's go to this "/abc",
which it should not work, and then it will
just redirect us to the Login page where
we can try to do it again. So if there is
no user, flash it, then redirect them to
the login. However, if there is a user,
show the reset password form.
Right? This is another form. The first
form to reset it. The second form to
actually take in the new username and
password. So I'll say, "res.render".
We're going to render out the reset file
and the title will be "Reset Your
Password". Good. So let's go ahead and
create that. We'll go into views,
and make a new file called "Reset.pug". We
have a form with a class of "form" and the
method will be "POST". In this case, I'm
going to leave the action off.
If you don't know this about HTML forms,
when you submit a form and it doesn't have
an action, the actual default is to the
current URL that we are on.
So it's just going to post to itself. Now,
I have an h2 tag that says "Reset Your
Password". Then, we're going to ask for
their new password and ask for them to
confirm their new password.
I'll have our Submit button. The value
will be "Reset Password".
So we only want to show this to them once
they've hit that URL.
I have lost my URL, so I'm going to send a
new one to myself, wesbos@gmail.com,
send the reset. This is my reset link. If
we try to visit that,
hopefully, it will render out this
Reset.pug file for us. There we go.
So what it did real quick, if we look at
our authController here,
is this actually looked for someone, and
then checked if there wasn't one.
If there was one, then we reach this. The
way you can tell that is you could just do
"console.log(user)", and open up your
terminal. I always like to clear out
anything that's in here. Then, watch. When
I refresh this, it actually shows me,
me. Because it found that token, and it
also found that the reset password was
well within that one-hour time that we
had. Good. So that's Step 2,
which is checking and figuring out what we
have. Then, the third part,
which is probably the biggest part, is
where we actually have to now update their
password given what they have. So let's go
back to our index.js and we'll say,
"router.post(`/account/reset/:token',".
Right? Because what's going to happen is
someone is going to fill this out with
their new password and we're going to
click Reset, and it's going to post the
data to the exact same URL that we have
there. So the same thing. The first thing
we want to do is check if their passwords
are the same. So we're going to make a
middleware. We'll write it now.
We'll make it in just a second,
"authController.confirmedPasswords".
Then, when the passwords are the same, so
I'm making sure that they are exactly the
same, we are going to finally update their
actual password. So we will catch errors.
This will be async/await, and we will call
it "authController.update".
Right? Now, this is a little bit hairy.
Let's put them on their own lines here.
There we go. So when somebody posts to
"/account" reset token.
Check that the passwords are the same. If
they are, finally, finally,
go ahead and update their passwords on the
books. So go back to our authController,
and we're going to make two here, one
called "confirmedPasswords",
one called "update". That is simply going
to be "req, res", and we're just going to
do a little check ourselves here. So we
could use some validation middleware.
Because this is so simple, we're simply
checking if two of the things are the
same. We're just going to do an "if"
statement. "if (req.body.password ===
req.body.password-confirm). Ooh, how do
you do that? That's got a dash in it.
You remember our reset, the name was
"passwordConfirm"? How do you access a
property on an object when you have a
dash? Well, you have to use square
brackets. That's how you access a property
when it has a dash in it.
So if the password is equal to the
confirm, then what do we do?
Well, that's fine. Just "next" "keepit
going!" So "keepit going!" and then when
we return from this function, stop it from
running. Because "next" will pass us down
our middleware, which will pass us to the
Update controller. Otherwise,
if they aren't the same, what do we tell
them? "req.flash" is an error.
We'll tell them, "Passwords do not match!"
and we'll redirect them back.
Okay. Oh. See how this is red here? It's
telling us that next doesn't exist,
because we forgot to pass it right here.
Now, let's try that. If we go back and I
try "wes" and "bos", and reset the
password, "Passwords do not match!" and
then they bring us back to this actual...
Good. But what if they do match?
Well, if they do match, then we go to the
next step of our middleware,
which is called "update". Go down here,
"exports.update = async (req,
res)". Now, here it is. First things
first, we first need to find the user,
and make sure that they are still within
that one hour in the token.
Why? Because someone could've loaded the
page, and then come back to it an hour
later. Then, it shouldn't work. Right? You
shouldn't have that security of just
having somebody leave the page open. So
we're going to find the user.
We can take this "findOne" from earlier,
and we can just paste it right into here.
So "user = await User.findOne" with the
token. The token is still going to be in
the URL, and then greater than now. Good.
Then, if there is no user,
we can do the exact same thing again,
which is we can copy and paste this.
You could even maybe refactor this out
into a middleware that will work,
so you don't have to copy and paste. But
that's not a big deal.
You can go either way. So if there's no
user, tell them that it is invalid.
Finally, if it is, then we want to go
ahead and update the user's password.
The method we're going to call is we're
going to take the user,
and we're going to call a "setPassword"
method on the user. Again,
that is made available to us, because
we're using that plugin in our user.js.
However, one big downside here is that it
is not promisified. It is call-backified.
So we want to make it into a promisify. So
I'll say, "const setPassword = promisify".
We're going to promisify
"user.setPassword", and we're going to
bind it to the user. Good. Well, we don't
have our promisify being pulled in yet.
So again, we'll go back to the top of this
file and say, "const promisify =
require(`es6-promisify`)". Good. We'll go
down here. We made this new method called
"setPassword", which will allow us to
await it, "await setPassword",
and we can pass it the new password, which
is going to be "req.body.password".
Right? That is going to set the new
password, and then it will hash it and
salt it, and do all of the stuff that it
needs to do behind the scenes.
However, we do need to get rid of the
password expires and the token,
and the way that you get rid of fields in
MongoDB is you set them to "undefined",
and they will get taken out. So I'll say,
"user.resetPasswordToken".
That's equal to "undefine".
"user.resetPasswordExpires" is undefined
as well. Then, we need to update the user.
So I'll say, "const updatedUser =",
well, "await user.save". Right? Because
this doesn't actually do anything in the
database. It just queues it up, and then
when we actually call ".save",
that will run to the database and actually
do the saving. So we are saving them,
and then we want to automatically log them
in. What that will do is it will not just
put them in the login form and tell them
to re-log in. We'll just automatically log
them in. So what we do here is we say,
"await req.login". So again,
"req" is our request, and there is a
method on it called ".login".
You see how all of these nice little
packages that we're using,
like Passport.js, will give us all of the
methods that we need via the middleware
that it introduced to them. I want to take
that updated user and pass it.
So this is a neat little part of
Passport.js. You can always pass it an
actual user, and it will just
automatically log that person in without
us having to pass them a username or a
password. So woo. Finally,
we can tell them it worked. So we'll flash
them, "success". Let's do a little dance
emoji. Say, "Nice. Your password has been
reset," or redirect them to the homepage.
All right. So given all that, let's go to
this URL again, our reset URL.
Let's try to change our passwords. Click
on Reset Password, and there we go.
It worked. What did it do? It
automatically updated my password,
and then it flashed us saying it worked.
It should be a lowercase s.
That's why it's not green. Then, it will
automatically log us in as well.
So that is our whole password reset flow.
There's a whole bunch to it,
because we first need to find if the user
exists, and then set a token,
and then send them an email. Then,
actually, render out the reset form.
Then, when they reset the form, we want to
confirm that their passwords are the same.
Then, finally, finally, finally, we want
to put the data on their new database and
redirect them to the homepage. If we go
back to this and I click on Refresh,
you'll notice that the salt and the hash
has changed, as well as those tokens and
those dates are now cleaned up. Because we
set them to "undefined",
they get deleted from our actual database.
So woo. Take a second and make sure you
really understand what's going on here and
what are all the pieces,
because there is a lot of moving parts
going on here. Once you feel comfortable
with that, move on to the next video,
which is we're going to be learning how to
send that URL via email.
♪ [music] ♪